once around Triton.
So Triton is a moon of Neptune. It's the
largest moon of Neptune and it's largest
by a very large amount. It represents
99.5%
of all of the mass that is in orbit
around that giant planet. And the pie
chart under the text there, blue is the
mass of Triton and the orangey red bit
is everything else in that pie chart.
All 15 of the other smaller moons, the
rings, everything that we know about. So
it's by far the dominant object in orbit
around Neptune. discovered in 1846
October the 10th by William Lel English
astronomer using his homemade 24in
reflector. This was very much a a thing
back in the day that English gentlemen
would make themselves a telescope and
get involved in astronomy.
Now William Lassel did not suggest a
name for this object. It was just
referred to for many years as the
satellite of Neptune. But in 1880,
Camille Flamrian
suggested the name Triton in his book
astronomy popular. He was French. And
this name comes from the Greek sea god,
the son of Poseidon. And of course,
Poseidon is the Greek god corresponding
to the Roman Neptune. So that made a lot
of sense. Um, but it was a couple of
decades before it was officially
adopted. So, a very long time without a
name. But I think Triton is an excellent
choice.
So, it orbits almost circularly around
Neptune,
but at a very large tilt.
And that's interesting.
It's not only tilted relative to the
equator of Neptune, but it's also tilted
relative to Neptune's path around the
sun at quite a high angle. But the
weirdest thing is that it's going
backwards. It's in a retrograde orbit.
So, it is going against the rotation of
the main planet itself. And that is
common for outer tiny moonlets of the
giant planets that have been captured as
captured asteroids etc. and completely
against um the direction that you would
normally get with things like our own
moon and uh the main moons of the other
planets. So, it's very very curious
indeed um that it's in this weird orbit.
Um it's also tidily locked. It's got
just like the Earth Moon system, one
face of Triton points at Neptune all the
time in order that this minimizes the
tidal effects of Neptune on Triton
itself. um that's uh tends to stabilize
quite rapidly when you have a reasonably
close orbit.
So physically it's the seventh largest
moon in the solar system and the second
largest in relation to its primary. Um
that gives it a diameter of 2,710
kilometers. So that's quite a big
object.
Massive enough to pull itself into a
round shape and with enough gravity to
hang on to an atmosphere.
In terms of composition, it's a
lightweight. It density is only just
over 2 g per cubic cm.
And this suggests it's made of ices,
things like water, ammonia, methane, and
any amount of the heavier elements must
be in quite short supply. We think it's
somewhere between 30 and 45% of the
total mass is water ice and there will
be other uh volatile compounds such as
ammonia and methane that have frozen out
onto it as well, even carbon monoxide,
things like that. kept warm in the
center by radioactive decay of isotopes
and by the oblquity tides due to its
orbital tilt. because it's orbiting at
this tilted angle relative to Neptune
and because Neptune is not a perfect
sphere, the rotational bulges at the
equator of Neptune are going to pull and
pull on the different uh parts of Triton
in a manner that is going to stretch it
and squeeze it as it moves around this
tilted orbit. And that flexing
internally is going to create frictional
heating and keep it a little bit warm.
We do think that's uh going to find that
there's a rocky metal core deep inside.
Uh we think most objects probably have
that. The heavier elements, the denser
elements tend to sink towards the center
during a phase when the object is still
molten and everything can move very
easily until it begins to cool down.
So the surface, well, if we look at it,
we've got this one photograph taken by
Voyager 2, and it shows a varied
terrain. We have the top region, which
seems to be covered in some interesting
grooves and looks like the surface of a
cantaloupe. And then down at the bottom
we have this sort of pink snow which is
made of frozen nitrogen, methane, carbon
monoxide and again those complex
tholins. The tholins being the carbon,
hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen compounds
created by strange chemical reactions
where the solar wind impacts the
material and knocks electrons off it and
activates it to undergo all these weird
and wonderful chemical reactions
building complex molecules.
We see changes over the time since we've
been observing it. We can now look at it
with things like the James Web Space
Telescope and indeed Hubble before it
and get a reasonable view. Not quite as
good as Voyager. Standing so far away
from it, it's very difficult.
And we can see that things have changed
since Voyager was there. And this looks
like seasonal variations again because
of that tilt of Triton's orbit compared
to the direction of the rotation around
the sun of Neptune being so extreme. It
tends to point one hemisphere more
towards the sun that than the other as
Neptune moves around in its 165 year
orbit of the sun. And the other thing
that this image doesn't show is any
impact craters. Um it's just completely
devoid of them. There are very very few
over the surface. You can if you look
really hard maybe make out one or two
small impact craters, although it's not
clear that there are very many at all.
So this means that the surface is young.
This is a high resolution picture and
there is an impact crater or two small
ones in this image but not very many.
And we think that the surface has an
average age less than 100 million years.
That's quite short time period compared
to the 4.6
billion years that the solar system has
been around. So the turnover here is
fairly rapid and as soon as a impact
crater gets made there is a probability
that it will get erased again by being
buried by new material that is being
brought to the surface and redeposited.
And up there in the uh top leftand
corner where the call out is pointing to
a very smooth region. There's one impact
crater in the middle of the uh picture
there, one up in that area. This is a
cryo lava lake. Cryol lava is low
temperature lava. So this is actually
things like water and n liquid nitrogen
and other
um
chemicals that we normally think of as
either liquids or gases. But at these
very low temperatures minus 230
centigrade they can take the place of
lava in terms of earthly volcanoes. You
can get eruptions that pour the material
out which then freezes on the surface
and that's what we think has happened in
that large smooth area and then a small
asteroid has come along and punched a
hole in it afterwards. And of course we
see small craters and not large ones
because large ones are rare. And so you
don't get very many of them in a 100
million years. And so the chances are
that all the large ones have been rubbed
out. But there's certainly fascinating
detail in the photograph there.
And then we have this region, the snowy
region down at the bottom of the main
image.
And this shows all these dark streaks.
And these dark streaks are these cryo
volcanoes. They're gizers of liquid
nitrogen erupting up out of the surface.
And then material carried up by the
geyser is being blown downwind. You can
see they're all pointing one way on this
image. These are all fresh deposits of
this dark ejector that's been brought up
with the liquid nitrogen and deposited
downrange. And we think that black
material that's got organic compounds in
it. And again, this points to something
that's creating this material deep
underground, perhaps in layers of water
trapped beneath this crust. And maybe
it's warm enough in the interior for
liquid water to exist. And maybe this is
some sort of biochemical
process, a living system that is
creating this organic material. And uh
then the heat is bringing it to the
surface and depositing it uh in these
black streaks. We don't know. It's pure
speculation at this point, but it's
really uh telling us that uh we need to
go and explore these worlds in much
greater detail than just one flyby.
I said the geysers are
going downwind. Well, that requires an
atmosphere and there is a thin layer of
nitrogen,
a little bit of methane, a little bit of
carbon monoxide. There are clouds of
nitrogen ice crystals. And if you look
at this uh image back across the limb of
the moon there, we can see a cloud in
the atmosphere of Triton.
There's also a haze layer. Again, this
is organic material, hydrocarbons and
nitrals. In other words, some of the
precursors of tholins again. And so
these are being created by the
photochemical reactions of sunlight on
methane and also of charged particles.
And again we're detecting the
seasonality in the atmosphere over the
last 30 years of study. We have seen
that the atmospheric pressure has
changed by a factor of three due to uh
more volatile material perhaps as Triton
has been warming up as the seasons on it
change.
And so everything about Triton, its
size, its mass, and its composition very
similar to both Pluto and Eis
outer parts of the solar system. And
this really suggests that maybe Triton
shared an origin with them, either being
formed roughly in the same region out of
the same types of chemicals and material
that was out there or even formed
together with them in some more complex
arrangement.
And we know that it cannot have formed
along with Neptune. This retrograde
orbit is just not right. All the inner
moons that you see on that diagram are
all going the other way. They are
prograde. They are going with the
direction of the spiraling of material
that would have formed Neptune and all
those little moons at roughly the same
time. Even the newly discovered one
marked in orange there, S204N1,
doesn't even have a name yet, is going
the same way. And in fact, all the moons
interior to Triton and go the same way.
Triton goes the other way. And in fact,
beyond Triton, there are some more
moons, some of which go the correct way
round and some are going backwards. And
this all looks like Triton having been
captured from the Kiper belt. It may
well explain the rather eccentric orbit
of the second largest moon of Neptune,
Niad, and uh the lack of any other
substantial moons at all. Because in
this uh organization, Triton would
disrupt the orbits or indeed collide
with any of the original moons that
happen to be in and around its vicinity.
And so that would uh probably account
for why it is the only large one left.
And there also some evidence that it may
have suffered a number of collisions.
Now that's a little bit tentative at the
moment, but it relates again to this
idea of interior heat. We think that
there is this liquid layer beneath the
ice shell and that heat is rising out of
the core from the rocky and metal center
of this uh moon.
But it shouldn't really be there if this
was an isolated body away from
everything else having had a
straightforward existence.
A small body of this mass with the heat
to conductivity that the materials have
would have ditched all its internal core
heat to space. There would be a little
bit left from the very small amount of
residual radioactivity. But that decays
over time and therefore by now after 4.6
billion years there wouldn't be very
much of that left.
So why is it still warm? Well, something
reheated it. This could have been a
collision. It could have been the tidal
squeezing during its capture phase
when it originated and came into the
gravitational well of Neptune. It would
have been in a highly elliptical orbit
and that has been gradually circularized
probably by a bit of friction with
material in orbit around Neptune and
sort of going the wrong way against a
gaseous envelope has gradually
circularized the orbit and of course
also it's ended up in tidal lock now but
it would not have been in tidal lock to
begin with. So the tidal heating through
squeezing and stretching may have
contributed a significant amount of heat
and it may have got a pulse of heat from
one or more impacts with either an
original moon um or a smaller moonlets
that it collided with and something
strange must have happened because to
get captured by a planet is not an easy
thing. A body that comes near to a
planet but does not crash into it will
pick up speed as it uh enters the
gravity well and just fly by and exit
the other side, slowing down, pulled
back towards the planet, but it'll leave
with approximately the same amount of
energy and momentum that it came in
with. It might be going in a different
direction, but it unless it can dump
that energy and momentum somehow, it's
not going to be able to enter orbit.
That can happen through a collision, but
that's a pretty drastic explanation. It
could happen through atmospheric drag
either with the main atmosphere which is
likely to lead to you either burning up
or skipping off the surface or perhaps
just through passage through the thinner
outer layers which might slow you down
and bring you into orbit. But that such
an orbit then would likely to be very
close to the planet indeed. more likely
is that it's an interaction between the
incoming object and a third body such as
an existing moon. And
the early ideas for this were that there
was a collision and that uh the proto
object, the precursor to Triton today,
collided with another moon in orbit
around Neptune already. And then the two
uh created a whole mass of debris and
formed one larger object plus lots of
small bits that then either fell onto
Neptune or onto what is now called
Triton.
But it could also be a very disruptive
event. And if you disrupt the whole
thing, then you're very likely that the
material that you end up with is only
that that ended up going the right way
round. It would be in a fairly normal
moonlike orbit rather than in the
retrograde orbit. So the collision idea
doesn't make a lot of sense.
What makes more sense is binary capture.
Now actually we know from our studies of
objects that we are finding in the Kiper
belt that a lot of them are binary or
multiple systems. There are a lot of the
Kiper belt objects that have moons some
of which can be quite sizable or they
can indeed be almost uh double dwarf
planets if you like.
And so perhaps what happened here was
that a binary kiper belt object
approached Neptune and when it does that
you get an exchange of energy.
Inevitably one of the objects is going
to be nearer Neptune than the other. And
from our understanding of tidal forces,
the
effect of that will be to pull the near
one towards Neptune much more strongly
than the further one is pulled and to
try and deflect it by more. And this can
unbind the binary. You can actually get
a situation where the difference in the
gravitational pull on the two objects
represents a greater potential energy
than the potential energy of binding
that's keeping the two together. And
then the object becomes unbound.
And what will happen then is one of them
will end up slowing out of the uh path
and ending up in orbit around Neptune.
And the other one picks up a lot of
kinetic energy and momentum and carries
away all of that and all the angular
momentum of their orbital coupling and
ends up being hurled away at much
greater speed. And so this is probably
the most likely method by which things
get captured is that they started as a
binary pair as in this artist's
illustration that we have here.
So it's quite possible and some people
have argued that indeed the binary pair
might have been Triton and Pluto and
this might explain why Pluto's orbit
intersects with that of Neptune and
maybe the two were somehow related in a
more complex system and that something
happened and Triton ended up being
captured and Pluto kicked out. Now I and
the analysis of the orbital dynamics
that's been done argues against that in
some cases. Um but of course things
could have changed since. So it's quite
difficult to know really.
So only one spacecraft has been to this
region of the solar system. We've had
one flyby in 1989 by Voyager 2. It only
imaged 40% of the surface of Triton. So
60% yet to look at as it whizzed past at
high speed. Took as many shots as it
could, but it really wasn't near Triton
for very long at all. And it took this
one lovely parting shot of Triton
backlit by the sun showing just that
thin cresant. And you can even see the
little bit of atmosphere there around
the planet. Well, I call it a planet.
It's a moon really, but I think of it as
being a very very interesting world and
hopefully we will get to go back. There
have been several ideas. There's been
the uh Discovery class Trident mission,
a new frontiers class Triton Ocean World
Surveyor and Nautilus. And the picture
that we have here is a hypothetical
Triton hopper spacecraft that would be
able to land on Triton and then hop from
one location to another in order to get
around. And uh these seem to be quite
the rage for trying to get samples uh
from more than one location. And of
course, they're probably going to have
to be nuclearpowered. And I'm not sure
that NASA's currently got any plutonium
left from its series of outer
solar system explorations.
So, what's going to happen in future
with Triton? Well, we've got 3.6 billion
years before its orbit decays.
Again, it is orbiting through and
against the flow of gas molecules around
Neptune. So, it's gradually losing
energy and momentum and will spiral in.
And in that time frame, it will end up
too close to Neptune inside what's
called the rash limit where the tidal
gravity forces from Neptune will cause
it to either get torn to pieces and form
a new ring around Neptune. And we got
this lovely James Web Space Telescope
picture here of Neptune with its rings.
And up at the top left there, that's
Triton.
or if it manages to survive the gravity
of Neptune, which seems doubtful, then
it could enter Neptune's atmosphere and
be consumed, and that would be very
spectacular. U but it's well, it's 3.6
billion years in the future, so all
sorts of things could happen by then.
So, thanks very much for listening and
I've enjoyed presenting this once around
Triton. I hope you've liked it, too.